This is a copy of the text at [http://www.wired.com/2014/08/edward-snowden/](http://www.wired.com/2014/08/edward-snowden/) for easier reading.

# Edward Snowden: The Untold Story

THE MESSAGE ARRIVES on my “clean machine,” a MacBook Air loaded only
with a sophisticated encryption package. “Change in plans,” my contact
says. “Be in the lobby of the Hotel \______ by 1 pm. Bring a book and
wait for ES to find you.” ¶ ES is Edward Snowden, the most wanted man
in the world. For almost nine months, I have been trying to set up an
interview with him—traveling to Berlin, Rio de Janeiro twice, and New
York multiple times to talk with the handful of his confidants who can
arrange a meeting. Among other things, I want to answer a burning
question: What drove Snowden to leak hundreds of thousands of
top-secret documents, revelations that have laid bare the vast scope
of the government's domestic surveillance programs? In May I received
an email from his lawyer, ACLU attorney Ben Wizner, confirming that
Snowden would meet me in Moscow and let me hang out and chat with him
for what turned out to be three solid days over several weeks. It is
the most time that any journalist has been allowed to spend with him
since he arrived in Russia in June 2013. But the finer details of the
rendezvous remain shrouded in mystery. I landed in Moscow without
knowing precisely where or when Snowden and I would actually
meet. Now, at last, the details are set.

I am staying at the Hotel Metropol, a whimsical sand-colored monument
to pre-revolutionary art nouveau. Built during the time of Czar
Nicholas II, it later became the Second House of the Soviets after the
Bolsheviks took over in 1917. In the restaurant, Lenin would harangue
his followers in a greatcoat and Kirza high boots. Now his image
adorns a large plaque on the exterior of the hotel, appropriately
facing away from the symbols of the new Russia on the next
block—Bentley and Ferrari dealerships and luxury jewelers like Harry
Winston and Chopard.

I've had several occasions to stay at the Metropol during my three
decades as an investigative journalist. I stayed here 20 years ago
when I interviewed Victor Cherkashin, the senior KGB officer who
oversaw American spies such as Aldrich Ames and Robert Hanssen. And I
stayed here again in 1995, during the Russian war in Chechnya, when I
met with Yuri Modin, the Soviet agent who ran Britain's notorious
Cambridge Five spy ring. When Snowden fled to Russia after stealing
the largest cache of secrets in American history, some in Washington
accused him of being another link in this chain of Russian agents. But
as far as I can tell, it is a charge with no valid evidence.

I confess to feeling some kinship with Snowden. Like him, I was
assigned to a National Security Agency unit in Hawaii—in my case, as
part of three years of active duty in the Navy during the Vietnam
War. Then, as a reservist in law school, I blew the whistle on the NSA
when I stumbled across a program that involved illegally eavesdropping
on US citizens. I testified about the program in a closed hearing
before the Church Committee, the congressional investigation that led
to sweeping reforms of US intelligence abuses in the 1970s. Finally,
after graduation, I decided to write the first book about the NSA. At
several points I was threatened with prosecution under the Espionage
Act, the same 1917 law under which Snowden is charged (in my case
those threats had no basis and were never carried out). Since then I
have written two more books about the NSA, as well as numerous
magazine articles (including two previous cover stories about the NSA
for WIRED), book reviews, op-eds, and documentaries.

But in all my work, I've never run across anyone quite like
Snowden. He is a uniquely postmodern breed of
whistle-blower. Physically, very few people have seen him since he
disappeared into Moscow's airport complex last June. But he has
nevertheless maintained a presence on the world stage—not only as a
man without a country but as a man without a body. When being
interviewed at the South by Southwest conference or receiving
humanitarian awards, his disembodied image smiles down from jumbotron
screens. For an interview at the TED conference in March, he went a
step further—a small screen bearing a live image of his face was
placed on two leg-like poles attached vertically to remotely
controlled wheels, giving him the ability to “walk” around the event,
talk to people, and even pose for selfies with them. The spectacle
suggests a sort of Big Brother in reverse: Orwell's Winston Smith, the
low-ranking party functionary, suddenly dominating telescreens
throughout Oceania with messages promoting encryption and denouncing
encroachments on privacy.

Of course, Snowden is still very cautious about arranging face-to-face
meetings, and I am reminded why when, preparing for our interview, I
read a recent *Washington Post* report. The story, by Greg Miller,
recounts daily meetings with senior officials from the FBI, CIA, and
State Department, all desperately trying to come up with ways to
capture Snowden. One official told Miller: “We were hoping he was
going to be stupid enough to get on some kind of airplane, and then
have an ally say: ‘You're in our airspace. Land.’ ” He wasn't. And
since he disappeared into Russia, the US seems to have lost all trace
of him.

I do my best to avoid being followed as I head to the designated hotel
for the interview, one that is a bit out of the way and attracts few
Western visitors. I take a seat in the lobby facing the front door and
open the book I was instructed to bring. Just past one, Snowden walks
by, dressed in dark jeans and a brown sport coat and carrying a large
black backpack over his right shoulder. He doesn't see me until I
stand up and walk beside him. “Where were you?” he asks. “I missed
you.” I point to my seat. “And you were with the CIA?” I tease. He
laughs.

Snowden is about to say something as we enter the elevator, but at the
last moment a woman jumps in so we silently listen to the bossa nova
classic “Desafinado” as we ride to an upper floor. When we emerge, he
points out a window that overlooks the modern Moscow skyline,
glimmering skyscrapers that now overshadow the seven baroque and
gothic towers the locals call Stalinskie Vysotki, or “Stalin's
high-rises.” He has been in Russia for more than a year now. He shops
at a local grocery store where no one recognizes him, and he has
picked up some of the language. He has learned to live modestly in an
expensive city that is cleaner than New York and more sophisticated
than Washington. In August, Snowden's temporary asylum was set to
expire. (On August 7, the government announced that he’d been granted
a permit allowing him to stay three more years.)

Entering the room he has booked for our interview, he throws his
backpack on the bed alongside his baseball cap and a pair of dark
sunglasses. He looks thin, almost gaunt, with a narrow face and a
faint shadow of a goatee, as if he had just started growing it
yesterday. He has on his trademark Burberry eyeglasses, semi-rimless
with rectangular lenses. His pale blue shirt seems to be at least a
size too big, his wide belt is pulled tight, and he is wearing a pair
of black square-toed Calvin Klein loafers. Overall, he has the look of
an earnest first-year grad student.

Snowden is careful about what's known in the intelligence world as
operational security. As we sit down, he removes the battery from his
cell phone. I left my iPhone back at my hotel. Snowden's handlers
repeatedly warned me that, even switched off, a cell phone can easily
be turned into an NSA microphone. Knowledge of the agency's tricks is
one of the ways that Snowden has managed to stay free. Another is by
avoiding areas frequented by Americans and other
Westerners. Nevertheless, when he's out in public at, say, a computer
store, Russians occasionally recognize him. “Shh,” Snowden tells them,
smiling, putting a finger to his lips.

<hr width="30%"/>

DESPITE BEING THE subject of a worldwide manhunt, Snowden seems
relaxed and upbeat as we drink Cokes and tear away at a giant
room-service pepperoni pizza. His 31st birthday is a few days
away. Snowden still holds out hope that he will someday be allowed to
return to the US. “I told the government I'd volunteer for prison, as
long as it served the right purpose,” he says. “I care more about the
country than what happens to me. But we can't allow the law to become
a political weapon or agree to scare people away from standing up for
their rights, no matter how good the deal. I'm not going to be part of
that.”

Meanwhile, Snowden will continue to haunt the US, the unpredictable
impact of his actions resonating at home and around the world. The
documents themselves, however, are out of his control. Snowden no
longer has access to them; he says he didn't bring them with him to
Russia. Copies are now in the hands of three groups: First Look Media,
set up by journalist Glenn Greenwald and American documentary
filmmaker Laura Poitras, the two original recipients of the documents;
*The Guardian* newspaper, which also received copies before the British
government pressured it into transferring physical custody (but not
ownership) to *The New York Times*; and Barton Gellman, a writer for 
*The Washington Post*. It's highly unlikely that the current
custodians will ever return the documents to the NSA.

That has left US officials in something like a state of impotent
expectation, waiting for the next round of revelations, the next
diplomatic upheaval, a fresh dose of humiliation. Snowden tells me it
doesn't have to be like this. He says that he actually intended the
government to have a good idea about what exactly he stole. Before he
made off with the documents, he tried to leave a trail of digital
bread crumbs so investigators could determine which documents he
copied and took and which he just “touched.” That way, he hoped, the
agency would see that his motive was whistle-blowing and not spying
for a foreign government. It would also give the government time to
prepare for leaks in the future, allowing it to change code words,
revise operational plans, and take other steps to mitigate damage. But
he believes the NSA's audit missed those clues and simply reported the
total number of documents he touched—1.7 million. (Snowden says he
actually took far fewer.) “I figured they would have a hard time,” he
says. “I didn't figure they would be completely incapable.”

Asked to comment on Snowden’s claims, NSA spokesperson Vanee Vines
would say only, “If Mr. Snowden wants to discuss his activities, that
conversation should be held with the US Department of Justice. He
needs to return to the United States to face the charges against him.”

Snowden speculates that the government fears that the documents
contain material that's deeply damaging—secrets the custodians have
yet to find. “I think they think there's a smoking gun in there that
would be the death of them all politically,” Snowden says. “The fact
that the government's investigation failed—that they don't know what
was taken and that they keep throwing out these ridiculous huge
numbers—implies to me that somewhere in their damage assessment they
must have seen something that was like, ‘Holy shit.’ And they think
it's still out there.”

Yet it is very likely that no one knows precisely what is in the
mammoth haul of documents—not the NSA, not the custodians, not even
Snowden himself. He would not say exactly how he gathered them, but
others in the intelligence community have speculated that he simply
used a web crawler, a program that can search for and copy all
documents containing particular keywords or combinations of
keywords. This could account for many of the documents that simply
list highly technical and nearly unintelligible signal parameters and
other statistics.

And there's another prospect that further complicates matters: Some of
the revelations attributed to Snowden may not in fact have come from
him but from another leaker spilling secrets under Snowden's
name. Snowden himself adamantly refuses to address this possibility on
the record. But independent of my visit to Snowden, I was given
unrestricted access to his cache of documents in various
locations. And going through this archive using a sophisticated
digital search tool, I could not find some of the documents that have
made their way into public view, leading me to conclude that there
must be a second leaker somewhere. I'm not alone in reaching that
conclusion. Both Greenwald and security expert Bruce Schneier—who have
had extensive access to the cache—have publicly stated that they
believe another whistle-blower is releasing secret documents to the
media.

In fact, on the first day of my Moscow interview with Snowden, the
German newsmagazine *Der Spiegel* comes out with a long story about the
NSA's operations in Germany and its cooperation with the German
intelligence agency, BND. Among the documents the magazine releases is
a top-secret “Memorandum of Agreement” between the NSA and the BND
from 2002. “It is not from Snowden's material,” the magazine notes.

Some have even raised doubts about whether the infamous revelation
that the NSA was tapping German chancellor Angela Merkel's cell phone,
long attributed to Snowden, came from his trough. At the time of that
revelation, *Der Spiegel* simply attributed the information to Snowden
and other unnamed sources. If other leakers exist within the NSA, it
would be more than another nightmare for the agency—it would
underscore its inability to control its own information and might
indicate that Snowden's rogue protest of government overreach has
inspired others within the intelligence community. “They still haven't
fixed their problems,” Snowden says. “They still have negligent
auditing, they still have things going for a walk, and they have no
idea where they're coming from and they have no idea where they're
going. And if that's the case, how can we as the public trust the NSA
with all of our information, with all of our private records, the
permanent record of our lives?”

The *Der Spiegel* articles were written by, among others, Poitras, the
filmmaker who was one of the first journalists Snowden contacted. Her
high visibility and expertise in encryption may have attracted other
NSA whistle-blowers, and Snowden's cache of documents could have
provided the ideal cover. Following my meetings with Snowden, I email
Poitras and ask her point-blank whether there are other NSA sources
out there. She answers through her attorney: “We are sorry but Laura
is not going to answer your question.”

<hr width="30%"/>

THE SAME DAY I share pizza with Snowden in a Moscow hotel room, the US
House of Representatives moves to put the brakes on the NSA. By a
lopsided 293-to-123 tally, members vote to halt the agency's practice
of conducting warrantless searches of a vast database that contains
millions of Americans' emails and phone calls. “There's no question
Americans have become increasingly alarmed with the breadth of
unwarranted government surveillance programs used to store and search
their private data,” the Democratic and Republican sponsors announce
in a joint statement. “By adopting this amendment, Congress can take a
sure step toward shutting the back door on mass surveillance.”

It's one of many proposed reforms that never would have happened had
it not been for Snowden. Back in Moscow, Snowden recalls boarding a
plane for Hong Kong, on his way to reveal himself as the leaker of a
spectacular cache of secrets and wondering whether his risk would be
worth it. “I thought it was likely that society collectively would
just shrug and move on,” he says. Instead, the NSA's surveillance has
become one of the most pressing issues in the national
conversation. President Obama has personally addressed the issue,
Congress has taken up the issue, and the Supreme Court has hinted that
it may take up the issue of warrantless wiretapping. Public opinion
has also shifted in favor of curtailing mass surveillance. “It depends
a lot on the polling question,” he says, “but if you ask simply about
things like my decision to reveal Prism”—the program that allows
government agencies to extract user data from companies like Google,
Microsoft, and Yahoo—“55 percent of Americans agree. Which is
extraordinary given the fact that for a year the government has been
saying I'm some kind of supervillain.”

That may be an overstatement, but not by much. Nearly a year after
Snowden's first leaks broke, NSA director Keith Alexander claimed that
Snowden was “now being manipulated by Russian intelligence” and
accused him of causing “irreversible and significant damage.” More
recently, Secretary of State John Kerry said that “Edward Snowden is a
coward, he is a traitor, and he has betrayed his country.” But in
June, the government seemed to be backing away from its most
apocalyptic rhetoric. In an interview with *The New York Times*, the new
head of the NSA, Michael Rogers, said he was “trying to be very
specific and very measured in my characterizations”: “You have not
heard me as the director say, ‘Oh my God, the sky is falling.’”

Snowden keeps close tabs on his evolving public profile, but he has
been resistant to talking about himself. In part, this is because of
his natural shyness and his reluctance about “dragging family into it
and getting a biography.” He says he worries that sharing personal
details will make him look narcissistic and arrogant. But mostly he's
concerned that he may inadvertently detract from the cause he has
risked his life to promote. “I'm an engineer, not a politician,” he
says. “I don't want the stage. I'm terrified of giving these talking
heads some distraction, some excuse to jeopardize, smear, and
delegitimize a very important movement.”

But when Snowden finally agrees to discuss his personal life, the
portrait that emerges is not one of a wild-eyed firebrand but of a
solemn, sincere idealist who—step by step over a period of years—grew
disillusioned with his country and government.

Born on June 21, 1983, Snowden grew up in the Maryland suburbs, not
far from the NSA's headquarters. His father, Lon, rose through the
enlisted ranks of the Coast Guard to warrant officer, a difficult
path. His mother, Wendy, worked for the US District Court in
Baltimore, while his older sister, Jessica, became a lawyer at the
Federal Judicial Center in Washington. “Everybody in my family has
worked for the federal government in one way or another,” Snowden
says. “I expected to pursue the same path.” His father told me, “We
always considered Ed the smartest one in the family.” It didn't
surprise him when his son scored above 145 on two separate IQ tests.

Rather than spending hours watching television or playing sports as a
kid, Snowden fell in love with books, especially Greek mythology. “I
remember just going into those books, and I would disappear with them
for hours,” he says. Snowden says reading about myths played an
important role growing up, providing him with a framework for
confronting challenges, including moral dilemmas. “I think that's when
I started thinking about how we identify problems, and that the
measure of an individual is how they address and confront those
problems,” he says.

Soon after Snowden revealed himself as a leaker, there was enormous
media focus on the fact that he quit school after the 10th grade, with
the implication that he was simply an uneducated slacker. But rather
than delinquency, it was a bout of mononucleosis that caused him to
miss school for almost nine months. Instead of falling back a grade,
Snowden enrolled in community college. He'd loved computers since he
was a child, but now that passion deepened. He started working for a
classmate who ran his own tech business. Coincidentally, the company
was run from a house at Fort Meade, where the NSA's headquarters are
located.

Snowden was on his way to the office when the 9/11 attacks took
place. “I was driving in to work and I heard the first plane hit on
the radio,” he says. Like a lot of civic-minded Americans, Snowden was
profoundly affected by the attacks. In the spring of 2004, as the
ground war in Iraq was heating up with the first battle of Fallujah,
he volunteered for the Army special forces. “I was very open to the
government's explanation—almost propaganda—when it came to things like
Iraq, aluminum tubes, and vials of anthrax,” he says. “I still very
strongly believed that the government wouldn't lie to us, that our
government had noble intent, and that the war in Iraq was going to be
what they said it was, which was a limited, targeted effort to free
the oppressed. I wanted to do my part.”

Snowden says that he was particularly attracted to the special forces
because it offered the chance to learn languages. After performing
well on an aptitude test, he was admitted. But the physical
requirements were more challenging. He broke both of his legs in a
training accident. A few months later he was discharged.

<hr width="30%"/>

OUT OF THE Army, Snowden landed a job as a security guard at a
top-secret facility that required him to get a high-level security
clearance. He passed a polygraph exam and the stringent background
check and, almost without realizing it, he found himself on his way to
a career in the clandestine world of intelligence. After attending a
job fair focused on intelligence agencies, he was offered a position
at the CIA, where he was assigned to the global communications
division, the organization that deals with computer issues, at the
agency's headquarters in Langley, Virginia. It was an extension of the
network and engineering work he'd been doing since he was 16. “All of
the covert sites—cover sites and so forth—they all network into the
CIA headquarters,” he says. “It was me and one other guy who worked
the late shifts.” But Snowden quickly discovered one of the CIA's
biggest secrets: Despite its image as a bleeding-edge organization,
its technology was woefully out-of-date. The agency was not at all
what it appeared to be from the outside.

As the junior man on the top computer team, Snowden distinguished
himself enough to be sent to the CIA's secret school for technology
specialists. He lived there, in a hotel, for some six months, studying
and training full-time. After the training was complete, in March
2007, Snowden headed for Geneva, Switzerland, where the CIA was
seeking information about the banking industry. He was assigned to the
US Mission to the United Nations. He was given a diplomatic passport,
a four-bedroom apartment near the lake, and a nice cover assignment.

It was in Geneva that Snowden would see firsthand some of the moral
compromises CIA agents made in the field. Because spies were promoted
based on the number of human sources they recruited, they tripped over
each other trying to sign up anyone they could, regardless of their
value. Operatives would get targets drunk enough to land in jail and
then bail them out—putting the target in their debt. “They do really
risky things to recruit them that have really negative, profound
impacts on the person and would have profound impacts on our national
reputation if we got caught,” he says. “But we do it simply because we
can.”

While in Geneva, Snowden says, he met many spies who were deeply
opposed to the war in Iraq and US policies in the Middle East. “The
CIA case officers were all going, what the hell are we doing?” Because
of his job maintaining computer systems and network operations, he had
more access than ever to information about the conduct of the
war. What he learned troubled him deeply. “This was the Bush period,
when the war on terror had gotten really dark,” he says. “We were
torturing people; we had warrantless wiretapping.”

He began to consider becoming a whistle-blower, but with Obama about
to be elected, he held off. “I think even Obama's critics were
impressed and optimistic about the values that he represented,” he
says. “He said that we're not going to sacrifice our rights. We're not
going to change who we are just to catch some small percentage more
terrorists.” But Snowden grew disappointed as, in his view, Obama
didn't follow through on his lofty rhetoric. “Not only did they not
fulfill those promises, but they entirely repudiated them,” he
says. “They went in the other direction. What does that mean for a
society, for a democracy, when the people that you elect on the basis
of promises can basically suborn the will of the electorate?”

It took a couple of years for this new level of disillusionment to set
in. By that time—2010—Snowden had shifted from the CIA to the NSA,
accepting a job as a technical expert in Japan with Dell, a major
contractor for the agency. Since 9/11 and the enormous influx of
intelligence money, much of the NSA's work had been outsourced to
defense contractors, including Dell and Booz Allen Hamilton. For
Snowden, the Japan posting was especially attractive: He had wanted to
visit the country since he was a teen. Snowden worked at the NSA
offices at Yokota Air Base, outside Tokyo, where he instructed top
officials and military officers on how to defend their networks from
Chinese hackers.

But Snowden's disenchantment would only grow. It was bad enough when
spies were getting bankers drunk to recruit them; now he was learning
about targeted killings and mass surveillance, all piped into monitors
at the NSA facilities around the world. Snowden would watch as
military and CIA drones silently turned people into body parts. And he
would also begin to appreciate the enormous scope of the NSA's
surveillance capabilities, an ability to map the movement of everyone
in a city by monitoring their MAC address, a unique identifier emitted
by every cell phone, computer, and other electronic device.

Even as his faith in the mission of US intelligence services continued
to crumble, his upward climb as a trusted technical expert
proceeded. In 2011 he returned to Maryland, where he spent about a
year as Dell's lead technologist working with the CIA's account. “I
would sit down with the CIO of the CIA, the CTO of the CIA, the chiefs
of all the technical branches,” he says. “They would tell me their
hardest technology problems, and it was my job to come up with a way
to fix them.”

But in March 2012, Snowden moved again for Dell, this time to a
massive bunker in Hawaii where he became the lead technologist for the
information-sharing office, focusing on technical issues. Inside the
“tunnel,” a dank, chilly, 250,000-square-foot pit that was once a
torpedo storage facility, Snowden's concerns over the NSA's
capabilities and lack of oversight grew with each passing day. Among
the discoveries that most shocked him was learning that the agency was
regularly passing raw private communications—content as well as
metadata—to Israeli intelligence. Usually information like this would
be “minimized,” a process where names and personally identifiable data
are removed. But in this case, the NSA did virtually nothing to
protect even the communications of people in the US. This included the
emails and phone calls of millions of Arab and Palestinian Americans
whose relatives in Israel-occupied Palestine could become targets
based on the communications. “I think that's amazing,” Snowden
says. “It's one of the biggest abuses we've seen.” (The operation was
reported last year by *The Guardian*, which cited the Snowden documents
as its source.)

Another troubling discovery was a document from NSA director Keith
Alexander that showed the NSA was spying on the pornography-viewing
habits of political radicals. The memo suggested that the agency could
use these “personal vulnerabilities” to destroy the reputations of
government critics who were not in fact accused of plotting
terrorism. The document then went on to list six people as future
potential targets. (Greenwald published a redacted version of the
document last year on the Huffington Post.)

Snowden was astonished by the memo. “It’s much like how the FBI tried
to use Martin Luther King’s infidelity to talk him into killing
himself,” he says. “We said those kinds of things were inappropriate
back in the ’60s. Why are we doing that now? Why are we getting
involved in this again?”

In the mid-1970s, Senator Frank Church, similarly shocked by decades
of illegal spying by the US intelligence services, first exposed the
agencies’ operations to the public. That opened the door to
long-overdue reforms, such as the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance
Act. Snowden sees parallels between then and now. “Frank Church
analogized it as being on the brink of the abyss,” he says. “He was
concerned that once we went in we would never come out. And the
concern we have today is that we’re on the brink of that abyss again.”
He realized, just like Church had before him, that the only way to
cure the abuses of the government was to expose them. But Snowden
didn’t have a Senate committee at his disposal or the power of
congressional subpoena. He’d have to carry out his mission covertly,
just as he’d been trained.

<hr width="30%"/>

THE SUN SETS late here in June, and outside the hotel window long
shadows are beginning to envelop the city. But Snowden doesn't seem to
mind that the interview is stretching into the evening hours. He is
living on New York time, the better to communicate with his stateside
supporters and stay on top of the American news cycle. Often, that
means hearing in almost real time the harsh assessments of his
critics. Indeed, it's not only government apparatchiks that take issue
with what Snowden did next—moving from disaffected operative to
whistle-blowing dissident. Even in the technology industry, where he
has many supporters, some accuse him of playing too fast and loose
with dangerous information. Netscape founder and prominent venture
capitalist Marc Andreessen has told CNBC, “If you looked up in the
encyclopedia ‘traitor,’ there's a picture of Edward Snowden.” Bill
Gates delivered a similarly cutting assessment in a *Rolling Stone*
interview. “I think he broke the law, so I certainly wouldn't
characterize him as a hero,” he said. “You won't find much admiration
from me.”

Snowden adjusts his glasses; one of the nose pads is missing, making
them slip occasionally. He seems lost in thought, looking back to the
moment of decision, the point of no return. The time when, thumb drive
in hand, aware of the enormous potential consequences, he secretly
went to work. “If the government will not represent our interests,” he
says, his face serious, his words slow, “then the public will champion
its own interests. And whistle-blowing provides a traditional means to
do so.”

The NSA had apparently never predicted that someone like Snowden might
go rogue. In any case, Snowden says he had no problem accessing,
downloading, and extracting all the confidential information he
liked. Except for the very highest level of classified documents,
details about virtually all of the NSA's surveillance programs were
accessible to anyone, employee or contractor, private or general, who
had top-secret NSA clearance and access to an NSA computer.

But Snowden's access while in Hawaii went well beyond even this. “I
was the top technologist for the information-sharing office in
Hawaii,” he says. “I had access to everything.”

Well, almost everything. There was one key area that remained out of
his reach: the NSA's aggressive cyberwarfare activity around the
world. To get access to that last cache of secrets, Snowden landed a
job as an infrastructure analyst with another giant NSA contractor,
Booz Allen. The role gave him rare dual-hat authority covering both
domestic and foreign intercept capabilities—allowing him to trace
domestic cyberattacks back to their country of origin. In his new job,
Snowden became immersed in the highly secret world of planting malware
into systems around the world and stealing gigabytes of foreign
secrets. At the same time, he was also able to confirm, he says, that
vast amounts of US communications “were being intercepted and stored
without a warrant, without any requirement for criminal suspicion,
probable cause, or individual designation.” He gathered that evidence
and secreted it safely away.

By the time he went to work for Booz Allen in the spring of 2013,
Snowden was thoroughly disillusioned, yet he had not lost his capacity
for shock. One day an intelligence officer told him that TAO—a
division of NSA hackers—had attempted in 2012 to remotely install an
exploit in one of the core routers at a major Internet service
provider in Syria, which was in the midst of a prolonged civil
war. This would have given the NSA access to email and other Internet
traffic from much of the country. But something went wrong, and the
router was bricked instead—rendered totally inoperable. The failure of
this router caused Syria to suddenly lose all connection to the
Internet—although the public didn't know that the US government was
responsible. (This is the first time the claim has been revealed.)

Inside the TAO operations center, the panicked government hackers had
what Snowden calls an “oh shit” moment. They raced to remotely repair
the router, desperate to cover their tracks and prevent the Syrians
from discovering the sophisticated infiltration software used to
access the network. But because the router was bricked, they were
powerless to fix the problem.

Fortunately for the NSA, the Syrians were apparently more focused on
restoring the nation's Internet than on tracking down the cause of the
outage. Back at TAO's operations center, the tension was broken with a
joke that contained more than a little truth: “If we get caught, we
can always point the finger at Israel.”

<hr width="30%"/>

MUCH OF SNOWDEN’S focus while working for Booz Allen was analyzing
potential cyberattacks from China. His targets included institutions
normally considered outside the military's purview. He thought the
work was overstepping the intelligence agency's mandate. “It's no
secret that we hack China very aggressively,” he says. “But we've
crossed lines. We're hacking universities and hospitals and wholly
civilian infrastructure rather than actual government targets and
military targets. And that's a real concern.”

The last straw for Snowden was a secret program he discovered while
getting up to speed on the capabilities of the NSA's enormous and
highly secret data storage facility in Bluffdale, Utah. Potentially
capable of holding upwards of a yottabyte of data, some 500
quintillion pages of text, the 1 million-square-foot building is known
within the NSA as the Mission Data Repository. (According to Snowden,
the original name was Massive Data Repository, but it was changed
after some staffers thought it sounded too creepy—and accurate.)
Billions of phone calls, faxes, emails, computer-to-computer data
transfers, and text messages from around the world flow through the
MDR every hour. Some flow right through, some are kept briefly, and
some are held forever.

The massive surveillance effort was bad enough, but Snowden was even
more disturbed to discover a new, Strangelovian cyberwarfare program
in the works, codenamed MonsterMind. The program, disclosed here for
the first time, would automate the process of hunting for the
beginnings of a foreign cyberattack. Software would constantly be on
the lookout for traffic patterns indicating known or suspected
attacks. When it detected an attack, MonsterMind would automatically
block it from entering the country—a “kill” in cyber terminology.

Programs like this had existed for decades, but MonsterMind software
would add a unique new capability: Instead of simply detecting and
killing the malware at the point of entry, MonsterMind would
automatically fire back, with no human involvement. That's a problem,
Snowden says, because the initial attacks are often routed through
computers in innocent third countries. “These attacks can be spoofed,”
he says. “You could have someone sitting in China, for example, making
it appear that one of these attacks is originating in Russia. And then
we end up shooting back at a Russian hospital. What happens next?”

In addition to the possibility of accidentally starting a war, Snowden
views MonsterMind as the ultimate threat to privacy because, in order
for the system to work, the NSA first would have to secretly get
access to virtually all private communications coming in from overseas
to people in the US. “The argument is that the only way we can
identify these malicious traffic flows and respond to them is if we're
analyzing all traffic flows,” he says. “And if we're analyzing all
traffic flows, that means we have to be intercepting all traffic
flows. That means violating the Fourth Amendment, seizing private
communications without a warrant, without probable cause or even a
suspicion of wrongdoing. For everyone, all the time.” (A spokesperson
for the NSA declined to comment on MonsterMind, the malware in Syria,
or on the specifics of other aspects of this article.)

Given the NSA's new data storage mausoleum in Bluffdale, its potential
to start an accidental war, and the charge to conduct surveillance on
all incoming communications, Snowden believed he had no choice but to
take his thumb drives and tell the world what he knew. The only
question was when.

On March 13, 2013, sitting at his desk in the “tunnel” surrounded by
computer screens, Snowden read a news story that convinced him that
the time had come to act. It was an account of director of national
intelligence James Clapper telling a Senate committee that the NSA
does “not wittingly” collect information on millions of Americans. “I
think I was reading it in the paper the next day, talking to
coworkers, saying, can you believe this shit?”

Snowden and his colleagues had discussed the routine deception around
the breadth of the NSA's spying many times, so it wasn't surprising to
him when they had little reaction to Clapper's testimony. “It was more
of just acceptance,” he says, calling it “the banality of evil”—a
reference to Hannah Arendt's study of bureaucrats in Nazi Germany.

“It's like the boiling frog,” Snowden tells me. “You get exposed to a
little bit of evil, a little bit of rule-breaking, a little bit of
dishonesty, a little bit of deceptiveness, a little bit of disservice
to the public interest, and you can brush it off, you can come to
justify it. But if you do that, it creates a slippery slope that just
increases over time, and by the time you've been in 15 years, 20
years, 25 years, you've seen it all and it doesn't shock you. And so
you see it as normal. And that's the problem, that's what the Clapper
event was all about. He saw deceiving the American people as what he
does, as his job, as something completely ordinary. And he was right
that he wouldn't be punished for it, because he was revealed as having
lied under oath and he didn't even get a slap on the wrist for it. It
says a lot about the system and a lot about our leaders.” Snowden
decided it was time to hop out of the water before he too was boiled
alive.

At the same time, he knew there would be dire consequences. “It's
really hard to take that step—not only do I believe in something, I
believe in it enough that I'm willing to set my own life on fire and
burn it to the ground.”

But he felt that he had no choice. Two months later he boarded a
flight to Hong Kong with a pocket full of thumb drives.

<hr width="30%"/>

THE AFTERNOON OF our third meeting, about two weeks after our first,
Snowden comes to my hotel room. I have changed locations and am now
staying at the Hotel National, across the street from the Kremlin and
Red Square. An icon like the Metropol, much of Russia's history passed
through its front doors at one time or another. Lenin once lived in
Room 107, and the ghost of Felix Dzerzhinsky, the feared chief of the
old Soviet secret police who also lived here, still haunts the
hallways.

But rather than the Russian secret police, it's his old employers, the
CIA and the NSA, that Snowden most fears. “If somebody’s really
watching me, they've got a team of guys whose job is just to hack me,”
he says. “I don’t think they've geolocated me, but they almost
certainly monitor who I'm talking to online. Even if they don't know
what you're saying, because it's encrypted, they can still get a lot
from who you're talking to and when you're talking to them.”

More than anything, Snowden fears a blunder that will destroy all the
progress toward reforms for which he has sacrificed so much. “I'm not
self-destructive. I don't want to self-immolate and erase myself from
the pages of history. But if we don't take chances, we can't win,” he
says. And so he takes great pains to stay one step ahead of his
presumed pursuers—he switches computers and email accounts
constantly. Nevertheless, he knows he's liable to be compromised
eventually: “I'm going to slip up and they’re going to hack me. It's
going to happen.”

Indeed, some of his fellow travelers have already committed some
egregious mistakes. Last year, Greenwald found himself unable to open
the encryption on a large trove of secrets from GCHQ—the British
counterpart of the NSA—that Snowden had passed to him. So he sent his
longtime partner, David Miranda, from their home in Rio to Berlin to
get another set from Poitras. But in making the arrangements, *The
Guardian* booked a transfer through London. Tipped off, probably as a
result of GCHQ surveillance, British authorities detained Miranda as
soon as he arrived and questioned him for nine hours. In addition, an
external hard drive containing 60 gigabits of data—about 58,000 pages
of documents—was seized. Although the documents had been encrypted
using a sophisticated program known as True Crypt, the British
authorities discovered a paper of Miranda's with the password for one
of the files, and they were able to decrypt about 75 pages. (Greenwald
has still not gained access to the complete GCHQ documents.)

Another concern for Snowden is what he calls NSA fatigue—the public
becoming numb to disclosures of mass surveillance, just as it becomes
inured to news of battle deaths during a war. “One death is a tragedy,
and a million is a statistic,” he says, mordantly quoting
Stalin. “Just as the violation of Angela Merkel's rights is a massive
scandal and the violation of 80 million Germans is a nonstory.”

Nor is he optimistic that the next election will bring any meaningful
reform. In the end, Snowden thinks we should put our faith in
technology—not politicians. “We have the means and we have the
technology to end mass surveillance without any legislative action at
all, without any policy changes.” The answer, he says, is robust
encryption. “By basically adopting changes like making encryption a
universal standard—where all communications are encrypted by
default—we can end mass surveillance not just in the United States but
around the world.”

Until then, Snowden says, the revelations will keep coming. “We
haven't seen the end,” he says. Indeed, a couple of weeks after our
meeting, *The Washington Post* reported that the NSA's surveillance
program had captured much more data on innocent Americans than on its
intended foreign targets. There are still hundreds of thousands of
pages of secret documents out there—to say nothing of the other
whistle-blowers he may have already inspired. But Snowden says that
information contained in any future leaks is almost beside the
point. “The question for us is not what new story will come out
next. The question is, what are we going to do about it?”
